Go ahead and start. I am
Mrs. Joe Blaisdell of Richmond, Texas, Fort Bend
County. I have lived here all of my life.
Mr. Blaisdell.
I'm Joe Blaisdell,
Richmond, Texas, Fort Bend County. And I've lived
there practically all my life. I was born in
Indiana. And I came to Texas with my folks when I
couldn't quite carry my own bag. In fact, I
couldn't walk. Okay, why did your folks come to
Fort Bend County? Well, I think more than anything
else, my daddy wanted to move to a warmer climate.
All right, what did y'all do when you came here?
What did your dad do for a living? A farmer. A
farmer. And Ms. Blaser, what's your approach to
this? Well, my father was born in Harris County and
moved here as a small child with his family. And my
mother came to Texas from Missouri when she was 10,
and they were looking for warmer climate, I think.
My father was a building contractor. was killed in
that activity. What year was this when they came
here? My mother is 83 today, and she was 12 years
old. Okay. Could you tell me, you know, like some of
the, do you remember some of the families here that
when you were a child, the influential families
loved? Fort Bend County, Rosenberg, or Richmond.
I was born in Rosenberg. Yes, ma'am. And married
and moved to Richmond in 31. Okay. You want to know
about Richmond people? Well, it doesn't matter.
Fort Bend County as a whole. Just, you know, what
you remember. Well, up until the time I moved and
married here, although the towns were so close, I
did not know too many people here very well. But the
Moore family were politically and financially
prominent. Judge Moore and all of his sons. The
Bassett family was a family. These are families
that were here back in history. They've been here a
long time.
This was primarily agriculture and ranching at
that time. There's been a lot of industry come in
since that time. Do you remember any, for
instance, floods or droughts or anything in
particular? Yes.
There was a terrible flood in 1913. I don't
remember too much of it except a lot of water, and we
were in it. When we were moving out, my people were
farming at the time, and we moved out, and I
remember the wagons and loaded with things in the
water and the wheels. That was 1913, and oh, off and
on through the years, yes, we've had bad floods.
Joe was old enough probably to tell you something
about the 1913 flood, were you, Joe? Well, the 1913
flood was It was the biggest flood that I've ever
heard any of the old-timers ever talk about. At
that time, the water was all the way past Sugar
Land. You could go from here to Sugar Land in a boat.
What kind of bridge did they have across the river?
Was there a different bridge? Well, the river
bridge is the same bridge that was there in 1913.
But the wagon bridge was up above the railroad
bridge about two blocks, three blocks. And it was
just a... old steel framework bridge with a wooden
floor in it. Now was this, there was one I heard that
was from Navasota that they brought down from
Navasota, but it was washed out when they were
driving some cattle. Well, that bridge went down
before we ever got here. But I can remember after
they built this second bridge there at the same
location. I remember back when they Oh, some of
these people that had farms and ranches south of
town and across the river and so forth, that when
they moved cattle, they wouldn't let them move but
10 head at a time across that bridge. And cattle
would get to trotting in that bridge and go
swinging. Yes, sir. And shucks, there'd be lots of
time getting maybe Two, three hundred head or more
of cattle across that bridge. It took a lot of time,
that ten-headed time. What year did it fall in? Ah,
that last one fell in 1922, and that flood in 22. We
used to ferry that from then until about 26, wasn't
it? 25. 25, 1925. How'd they work the ferry? Was it
a... It was a... Hand power. Hand power? had a cable
and all they had was sort of a board and they were
about two and a half feet long with blocks nailed on
the end of it. Two blocks where they'd line and go
through it and they'd catch it. What happened to
it? It got washed away or they just built a new
bridge or what? They built a new bridge on this side
of the railroad bridge. When did Highway 59 come
through? This bridge was built right there. It was
opened in 1925, this steel bridge down here. The
old bridge went in on 22 and then we rode the ferry
from then on until we got the new bridge built. The
ferry was over by the 138th Street. The road is in
the same location
going to Houston. And originally, it was on the
north side of the railroad track when they put the
new bridge in, where they got it on the south side
all the way through. But there's about a mile out
there that's on the north side of the track and then
had to cross over. And that was, oh, that road was a
shell road way back when I was a little bit of kid.
That shell from Richmond, Houston. Do you know
anything about how Richmond got started? You
know, like Richmond-Rosenberg, the background
of it? Well, Richmond got started back,
oh, 18-something.
That is according to the history of Fort Bend
County. People came from Galveston down to Mouth
of the Brothers down here, and then come up the
river and found this bend in the river. And they
liked the looks of it, so that's where they started
the town. Yes, they built the fort here. I don't
know whether you know it or not, From that bridge
over here to the WKM plant, it's only about a mile.
And the Brazos River is right behind that WKM
plant. But it makes this way long loop up there.
It's 10, 12 miles around the river that make that
one mile across there. Richmond got its charter at
the same time Houston got theirs in the name of
Harrisburg. But they had visions of navigating
the Brazos River. But Houston got busy and worked
up the ship channel, dug it out, and processed
that. So they grew and we didn't. Nothing was done
here. Now, Santa Ana came through Richmond, right
over here, didn't you? Through this general area,
I don't know just where. Because I read somewhere
like, you know, the Jane Long graveyard right over
here. Jane Long is in the Morton Cemetery. The
Morton Cemetery, that's right. And didn't Santa,
well, you know, I read somewhere that Santa came
through there and he destroyed some of the graves,
his soldiers. That I couldn't tell you. But that
cemetery is something to see. If you were to go
through it and visit it, the names in history that
you know on the tombstones over there, Dex Smith.
Jane Long, where was her boarding house here? You
know where the coffee shop is. It was right behind
it. In fact, it was only torn down. Post Office
Pharmacy. This building, her boarding house was
torn down about what, Joe? What, five years ago? I
don't know. I don't know, but I've always been
under the impression that that boarding house was
across the track, which burned down. I can
remember when it burned down. It was an old
two-story hotel building deal. It was just across
the railroad track right at the back of that drug
store down there. Well, now, this house that they
tore down a few years ago was the one that was
supposed to have been hers. The one in the back of
that old Mama Schiff's old home? Right back of Post
Office Pharmacy. Well, that old Mama Schiff,
that's where Jake Eichmann was raised. Mama
Schiff, who was she? Well, she was an old Jewish
rabbi's wife. But this Jake Eichmann, all these
Eichmann sporting goods stores in Houston, Yes,
sir. And all over the state.
Mama Schiff was his aunt. And they raised him right
there. He went to business in Richmond when he was a
young man. Okay, the Oshman's is here in Richmond
now. That doesn't have anything to do with the
Oshman's Burning Goods, does it? There's the
Eichmanns over here now. They're probably
practically all of them some kind of kinfolk.
That's right. That's right. There were several
families, but then they're all of them cousins or
brothers or what have you. Harry Robinson in
there. His wife is an Eichmann. Robinson. He runs
that store. Oh, OK. Another question. You've
lived here all these years. What changes have you
seen, for instance, in the schools and the means of
making a living, just general appearance of the
town? Well, building, I guess, is the biggest
thing. Ever since the war was over, there's been
tremendous growth in the two towns. And well, you
can see how much it's grown since you came here just
a little while. There is some industry here now
where for years we had no industry. Gins and the
cotton oil mill out here, and that was just about
it. We just didn't have any industry. Could you
tell me about the schools?
Lamar Consolidated was consolidated in what, 60?
No, no. Lamar Consolidated was
the independent districts of Rosenberg and
Richmond, and then the rural areas that worked
through the courthouse or through the state
system went in with them within these boundaries
sounded. This was done by vote in 1947. And I set up
the first tax rolls in 1948. I was their assessor
and collector from 48 through 57. And then
retired from that. And it showed tremendous
growth in that period of time, but then it was, we
thought it was, but it just doesn't compare at all
to what's happened since then. Well, has there
been a period of just stagnation like since the
war, where it just, you know, just everything kind
of leveled off for a while? Are you talking about
the economy, the school, or what? Well, just
general growth of the Fort Bend County Yards. It's
just been growing ever since the war. It's been
growing ever since. And when I left the school, I
went into the savings and loan business, where I
had an opportunity to watch buildings. And it just
constantly grew. And we kept thinking, well, it
has to slow down. But it didn't until just
recently. When did the Savings and Loans start?
What year was this? The Gulf Coast started in 1958.
1958. OK. There was one at Rosenberg that got its
charter in 1933. Is that the Fort Bend? Fort Bend
Federal. Fort Bend Federal. OK. And another
thing. people coming into the community like, you
know, like your Czechs and your Germans and what
nationalities were here when y'all? Well, I can
remember when I knew everyone in Rosenberg and it
was primarily German and Czech. There were a few
Mexicans and of course there were your Negroes.
There were not too many others. There were a few
English. Dr. Yates' family, that group, but there
was not many. That was it. Okay, and like... A few
Jews, you know. That would be the Oshmans and all of
them, right? Well, now, I'm talking about when I
was coming along, and that would be... Oh, there
were the Rosenzweigs and the Lipmans and... Well,
the Oshmans weren't here then? Yes, they weren't
here. They were in Richmond. Okay, gotcha then.
You see, Richmond did not want the railroad. Santa
Fe. The Santa Fe railroad. They did not want all of
that track and all of this, the hub for all these
different areas. So Rosenberg was selected as a
site for this. And it was named for a man named
Rosenberg. It was the Rosenberg Library in
Galveston. He was a financier. He was a big man. And
he was instrumental in getting Rosenberg
started. That's why Rosenberg was started,
because Richmond didn't want it. Rosenberg
started that, more or less, as a water stop on St.
Pete.
All the locomotives were steamed then, and they
had to get water. There were nine men. And they had a
pump station there in Rodenburg for years until
they wanted diesel. Of course, they had two
railroads together, Southern City and Santa Fe,
and both used water from the same well and tank.
Okay, like, when did, uh, when, you know, like,
modern facilities, like, when did y'all get city
sewage and water and all this? My uncle put in the
first electric plant and ice plant in Richmond and
Rosenberg in
the early 20s, I guess. Very early 20s. I know I was
just, it might have been before 20, was it, Joe?
Well, of course, they had an ice and light plant
here. But Rosenberg is. And your uncle bought them
out. Well, but Rosenberg, he put that in. That's
the old Rosenberg light, was the light plant now.
The Houston Light and Power Company bought him
out. Okay. Him and his partner, there were two of
them. Didn't he? Now, where's that ice plant in
Rosenberg I've seen by the U-Totem over there? You
know what I'm talking about? Not by the U-Totem,
but it's back there by Lane's Trading Post? Right.
Back in there. All right. Is that the old plant that
you're talking about? Right. Okay. And he sold it
to the Houston Light and Power Company. It was
before the 20s. I was a little girl when they put
electric lights in our house. It was way before
that. I
know it was before 1923, but I don't remember yet
when it was built. It was planned to come down here.
It was wild here. The only time we had lights was at
night. They'd crank that generator up down there
and run it at night and take time to shut it down. We
didn't get natural gas until about 26? 26, I think.
I think it was about 26. In fact, it was almost 27.
Boy, it was 27 before they got Got all the customers
hooked up on fuel. I'd say the electricity was
shortly before the 1920s. Gas about 1926. And then
they began, everybody had septic tanks, you know.
Then, I don't know just exactly when they did put
the sewage in. They had no sewage deal here. They
just run off. Of course, that was before the
bridges there. Just run off. Well, they just
wanted to open the river right there. Well, there
was a building over there that burned right at this
end of the bridge. There used to be a water tower
right there, and the sewage went right over the
river right there at the back of it. And that was
just a sort of a get-by proposition for some
people. They didn't try to cover all the towns.
That in 1929
is when they started then to put this
sewer business in, 2930 along there. That's when
they put sewers all over town here. That's what was
about to say. All right. Another question. Do
y'all remember
anything real big that happened, for instance,
like bank robberies, murders, or any big court
cases of any type that was in Mr. Rosenberg? Within
our lifetimes, it was pretty settled. Before
that, it was rugged. Well, I don't remember ever
having a bank robbery handled here. a couple of
years ago when this camp was running out of
motorcycles and they caught him out here before he
got five miles from town. Well, do y'all know, do
y'all, have y'all ever heard of any of the famous
outlaws, you know, like they came from
Richmond-Rosenberg? I mean, no, Richmond was a
pretty rugged town when it first started.
I think it had more reputation than it actually,
than was actually fact. I think a lot of that was Of
course, it was rugged. It had to be to survive. I
think a lot of its reputation came from your
woodpeckers, you know, Jaybird's woodpeckers.
That's another thing to ask about the Jaybird and
the woodpecker revolt. Well, of course, that was
before my time and his time. Did y'all ever hear
anything about it? Jaybird then was in 1889.
That's when they had that shootout. Didn't the
governor had to send the state militia down here or
something to break it up? No. I never read anything
about it or heard anything about it.
Back when I was a little kid, of course, I was a
Yankee.
But there used to be an old man here, old Major
Davidson. He was an old Confederate veteran. And
he took me to several different Confederate
conventions. And I just, oh, I was 10, 12 years old,
I guess. And I
was shook. So I played a lot of them old bugger
talking, but I never did hear anybody say anything
about them sending me. state militia and things
like that. I don't know whether we even had state
militia back in those days. Well, it doesn't say
anything about it in your Wharton's history of
Fort Bend or any of those. I haven't read of it. The
reason I said that is because I, you know, like in
the book that I'm taking, Texas History Now, and I
read somewhere in the book it said something about
the Jaybird. Jaybird and Whitpecker revolt. And
it said something like the governor, I forgot who
the governor was during that period, but he sent
They called for him for help, and I think I heard he
sent the state militia down here, or some men
maybe, just some men to break it up. Well, the fight
was pretty much between the old timers right here,
you know, that the coffee baggers came in and they
were taking over the offices and running things.
Oh, several of them personally were in the know.
What was the policy of the Jaybirds and the
Woodpeckers? Was it like the Republicans and
Democrats of nowadays, or would it be the
Radicals? Well, they had a problem there that went
back to the Civil War. You know, there's lots of
people in Washington and in the northern states
that wanted to run on the Confederate States
pretty rough when the war was over. And they had
some people here in the courthouse that seemed to
be looking out for number one more than anything
else. And finally, my chief and local people got
together and decided to move them out. And they
did. Yeah, the old courthouse used to sit right
where the city hall, right in the middle of that
block where the city hall lived down there. There,
there in . Before they built this new courthouse.
Okay. And that was the courthouse in 1889 when they
had the fight, and there was bullet holes around
them walls in there.
One old skimp that I knew real well was just, well, I
believe he was 14 years old.
And this house, well, it's right back post office.
On the highway there. It's got a sort of a story and a
half, and that was a Mack Farland home. old man
Earl, they called him old man Earl, he was 14 years
old then. And he ended up down one of them little
dormer windows up there in the back of the house and
shooting right in through the courthouse, right
in through the door of the courthouse. How many
people were injured or killed in that thing? Was it
just blown out of proportion? Well, the thing of it
was, it was some killings there. Even before the
fight here, there was killings in Wharton,
Galveston, and all the people from around here.
The
main thing here is when I was a kid, I'd say at least
Half or more than half of the people around here
always wore pistols. And they didn't wear it to be
mean or tough or anything. They just wore it, by
golly, for protection. And they didn't let
anybody run over them. And the only woodpecker
that I remember lived right across the street here
when I started school. He was the only one that I
ever knew of around here that people said was a
woodpecker. And he admitted it himself, but he
wasn't involved in the fight at all. He lived right
across the street. He ended up dying. His daughter
works down there for love now, that Miss Harris
down there. There's an old man booting his
daughter. Uh-huh. Miss Harris. Ms. Harris has got
a daughter that teaches at the school. Is that,
what's her name? She's an art teacher. Is that the
one? I don't know. Because there's the lady,
there's the daughter, and then there's the mother
that works at Love's. No, the daughter doesn't
have a daughter. No, not the daughter, but the son
did. You know what I'm talking about? There was no
son. The daughter. Audrey Harris had only
daughters. And then she had, one of the daughters
got married and the husband ran off, and she had a
boy by her. I was just wondering about that. But
another thing, when y'all were kids, what went on
around here? Like nowadays, we go to the show. Most
of the time, we go to Houston. What did y'all do
around here? I did the same thing. Went to Houston
to shop. Went to Houston during the week. We'd go on
Sunday afternoons to the movies or something like
that. Joe played baseball. Yeah, but that was up
29, 30, along there. Well, we played ball around
here back when I was a little kid. We didn't have
anybody arrange any games or anything. We just got
together and chewed a little side and played ball.
Well, we had a lot of parties. And church.
Everybody went to church more. There was a lot of
social life connected with your churches. What
was the main church here? What was your main church
in Richmond? Baptist and Baptist. There's the
Tozer up there. And Catholic? I figured the
Catholic would be because they always get checks.
Catholic church. It was put in here. Well, the
Episcopal church, it wasn't there. didn't have
near the congregation that the Baptists had. They
had the money.